# Sparkify Postgres ETL

This is first project for data engineering nanodegree at udacity. 
In this project, the following concepts were applied:
- Data Modeling with Postgres
- Build an ETL pipeline using Python
- Design star schema for database


## Context

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. 
The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. 
Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, 
as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. 
Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. 
You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

### Data
- song data: stored under data/song_data, each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. Sample song data looks like:
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```
- log data: The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. Sample log data looks like:
```
{"artist":"Slipknot","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Aiden","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Ramirez","length":192.57424,"level":"paid","location":"New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540283578796.0,"sessionId":19,"song":"Opium Of The People (Album Version)","status":200,"ts":1541639510796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"20"}
```

## Database Schema
Star Schema is used for this project:
There is one fact table(songplay table) containing all the key metrics associated to each event,
and 4 dimension tables, each with a primary key referenced to columns in the fact table.


**Fact Table**:
**songplays** : records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id(INT) :id of each song play
- start_time(VARCHAR): timestamp of the start time
- user_id(INT): id of user
- level(VARCHAR): level of user (free|paid)
- song_id(VARCHAR): id of song 
- artist_id(VARCHAR): id of artist to that song
- session_id(INT): id of user session
- location(VARCHAR): user location
- user_agent(VARCHAR): user agent used to access Sparkify

**Dimension Table**
**user_table** : users in the app
- user_id (INT): id of user
- first_name (VARCHAR): first name of user
- last_name (VARCHAR): last name of user
- gender (VARCHAR): gender of user (M | F)
- level (VARCHAR): level of user (free|paid)

**song** - songs in music database
- song_id (VARCHAR): id of Song
- title (VARCHAR): title of Song
- artist_id (VARCHAR): id of song Artist
- year (INT): Year of song release
- duration (FLOAT): Song length

**artist_table** - artists in music database
- artist_id (VARCHAR): ID of Artist
- name (VARCHAR): Name of Artist
- location (VARCHAR): Name of Artist city
- lattitude (FLOAT): Lattitude location of artist
- longitude (FLOAT): Longitude location of artist

**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
- start_time (VARCHAR): Timestamp of row
- hour (INT): Hour associated to start_time
- day (INT): Day associated to start_time
- week (INT): Week of year associated to start_time
- month (INT): Month associated to start_time 
- year (INT): Year associated to start_time
- weekday (INT): Name of week day associated to start_time

## Project Structure
In addition to the data files, the project workspace includes six files:

1. test.ipynb displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.
2. create_tables.py drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.
3. etl.ipynb reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.
4. etl.py reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.
5. sql_queries.py contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.
6. README.md provides discussion on your project.

## Project Steps
**Create Tables**
1. Write CREATE statements in sql_queries.py to create each table.
2. Write DROP statements in sql_queries.py to drop each table if it exists.
3. Run create_tables.py to create your database and tables.
4. Run test.ipynb to confirm the creation of your tables with the correct columns. Make sure to click "Restart kernel" to close the connection to the database after running this notebook.

Then run the following command in terminal:
```
python create_tables.py
```

**ETL Process**
1. Connect to sparkify database and parse all song related data.
2. We walk through the tree files under /data/song_data, and process for each json file using function process_song_file.
3. Using python read_json function to parse JSON file to dataframe and select needed field in the dataframe:
    ```
    song_data = [song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration]
    ```
    ```
     artist_data = [artist_id, artist_name, artist_location, artist_longitude, artist_latitude]
    ```
4. Insert these data to the responding tables.
5. After we process all song data, we start to process log data.
6. We walk through the tree files under /data/log_data, and process for each json file using function process_log_file.
7. Similarly, using read_json function to parse JSON file to dataframe format.
8. Select rows where page = `NextSong`
9. Convert the ts timestamp column to datetime, extract the timestamp, hour, day, week of year, month, year, and weekday from the ts column and set time_data to a list containing these values in order.
10. Specify labels for these columns and set to column_labels, and create data frame `df_time` using the time_data and corresponding column_labels.
11. Iterate through the row of df_time, and insert each row to time table.
12. We select needed field from log data dataframe and insert them to user table.
13. Finally we lookup song and artist id from song and artist tables by song name, artist name and song length in the log file, together with other fields, insert the records to songplay table.

After filling the etl.py, run the following command in terminal:
```
python etl.py
```
